Latest malware incidents demonstrated the enormous harm that modern worms can cause, but also showed that new breeds of malcode appear almost concurrently with the announcement of new vulnerabilities or even before them (a situation known as zero day vulnerability exploitation). Thus it is clear that traditional security applications such as firewalls, IDS or anti­viruses, while beneficial, no longer provide sufficient protection against rapidly spreading malware. Therefore, it is useful to explore other more radical protective mechanisms that can act complementary to the existing security infrastructure. To achieve that, it is essential to understand the propagation dynamics of fast spreading worms so as to identify the available time frames, in which reaction is both feasible and effective. Staniford proved that highly virulent worms are fully capable of infecting the susceptible population in less than 15 minutes, as in the case of a Warhol worm. Empirical evidence confirms the validity of these assumptions: the Slammer worm required only 10 minutes to infect the vulnerable population using the simplest propagation strategy (random scanning), while the theoretical limits of an ultra­virulent worm fall well below the psychological one minute limit.

To alleviate the effects of rapid malcode we propose a cooperative containment algorithm based on the following assumptions.
1. The most vulnerable systems are personal computers whose respective owners do not have the time nor the skills to protect them sufficiently. In other words their owners are not security professionals that are constantly aware of the trends of malware activity. At best it is reasonable to expect the aforementioned to:
a. Have enabled the automatic downloading and installation of the new updates and patches on their OS of choice (usually some flavor of Windows).
b. Have installed some kind of security application. Most probably an anti­virus with automatic updating of signatures and a roughly configured firewall.
Experienced users or small offices with a minimal IT infrastructure may also
host an Intrusion Detection System.
2. Fine grained security policies are perfectly suited for large organizations and enterprises that have valuable digital assets to protect in very complex environments with numerous different user groups, each one requiring different resources and access rights to perform their duty. On the other hand, small office or home office (SOHO) users can be sufficiently protected even with less detailed security policies.

We are arguing by simply changing different predefined security policies it is
possible to hold the attacks of most malware at bay. As most attacks have common attack vectors, such as the HTML engine of a popular e­mail client or the scripting abilities of an equally popular browser, by disabling these services only during worm epidemics and re­-enabling them after the containment of the epidemic, we can adequately protect them against most threats. SOHO users on the other hand, may agree with a temporary hardening of their system in order to protect themselves against a malcode epidemic, but they are unlikely to accept a permanent disabling of their useful but not essential services and applications.

Our algorithm is called PRoactive Malware Identification System ­ PROMIS and is based on a peer­to­peer (P2P) architecture to provide timely information to the members of a specially crafted P2P group.
